It's an evolution of the Imperial cult. Back then each planet's governor also managed the affairs of the cult on their planet, in a cultural focus. Things like festivals, ceremonies, the general public's interactions with the pantheon, etc. Very Greco-Roman sort of stuff.


Prior to the collapse, though, as authority of the Emperor waned and internal divisions started solidifying, the cult went through a period of reforming into something that didn't rely entirely on the imperial bureaucracy to handle its business. This mean a new, independent structure and hierarchy. Still based around the governors, but now with a set of organs under them to handle things while the governors were busy trying to keep things from falling apart and/or trying to carve out influence as civil war emerged.
It was a key part of keeping civilization together as the system fell apart. In that, it not only gained a lot more influence, but it also become a lot more organized. Post-collapse, it's something that's a lot more Christian looking. With local clergy and bodies overseeing the matters of faith and worship.
It's loosely based off of Mormonism, especially my experience being an outside surrounded by it.
So not Mormonism in the real sense, but Mormonism in the way a non-Mormon would interpret it based on the history of the faith.


Well the Cult would have had a lot of rules dictating interaction between people and their communities, and how people interacted with nature. Cultural things, like manners, respect for elders, raising children, harvesting of resources, usage of common spaces, etc.
Post-collapse, the cult expands into interactions between people and their society. Much more legal things, like what drinks are allowed to be sold, where certain groups are allowed to go at certain times, what the punishment for stealing is, etc.


And a much more active role, rather than a passive one. Like, the cult wasn't necessarily directly involved in things unless you made them involved. Rather than the church involving itself in your life uninvited.
Pre-collapse: If I wronged an elder, assuming it wasn't illegally according to Imperial Law, then the cult wouldn't come after me. There's just a cultural guilt (and perhaps pressure from peers) to ask forgiveness.


Post-collapse: If I wronged an elder, someone might report that to my local clergy, and depending on them I might either get an invitation to repent, or I might get Officers of the Church stopping by and lecturing me on respect for elders.
This is great when you're trying to get everyone on board with the "killing each other in civil war is bad", not so great when you start getting people going "Maybe we need to reform things now that civilization is stabilized."
Stabilization turns into oppression.
And it's not the fault of the belief system. The gods are cherished, the mythical history of the Pioneers coming to the system from Cradle and building a new home is a fundamental part of their culture.